This assignment constitutes part II of your multi-sprint journey exploring client-server architecture. In part I, you built the chatterbox client-side app, and configured it to communicate with a remote Parse server that we had built for you. Today, you'll rip out the Parse server, and replace it with a local one you'll build using Node.js.

In this assignment, you'll use Node.js to implement a simple chat server. Users should be able to connect to your Node server with a web browser, choose a username, send messages, and see the messages sent by all the other users connected to the same server.

This sprint continues the trend of moving you into more autonomous problem solving. Expect that there are going to be many situations going forward through the curriculum where there is significant challenge in identifying what problem needs solving even before your work begins on how to solve it. Challenge yourself to be constructive in the face of unclear objectives and difficult-to-find solutions. Your ability to orient and work in unfamiliar environments with unfamiliar tools (especially poorly-documented tools) will be a pillar of your success as a software engineer.

What's in this repo
server/server/basic-server.js is a very-well-documented bare-bones HTTP server. Its comments include instructions on how to run it.
server/server/request-handler.js is a nearly-empty file where you'll do your work.
server/spec/ has the Mocha specs that you will use and expand upon in creating your server.
Getting Started
You built your chatterbox-client implementation in different pairs, so your first order of business should be deciding whose chatterbox-client code is the cleanest and easiest to understand. Once you've agreed, copy the code from that repo into this new repo to get started.

You should try to use your own chatterbox-client code (or your pairs) for this sprint, but if your solution is severely lacking in some irreparable way, you can use the provided solution to chatterbox-client instead.

Installing Node

NodeJS is already installed on the workstations, but if you want to install it on your personal computer, it's best to use a utility that allows you to run specific versions easily. There are several out there, but the most straightforward one is called n.

In order to install n you will need npm, which comes installed with node. You can first install node through brew so that you get npm, like so:
  1│brew install node
Now, install node using n, like so:
  1│
  2│npm install -g n
n stable
Override the node installed by brew with
  1│n stable
Uninstall the version of node you installed with brew so that only the n version remains:
  1│brew uninstall node
Modules

Read this excellent article written by HR alumni Cho Kim, Understanding Module.exports And Exports In Node.js to learn about node's module system.

Debugging Node

Now is the time to double down on your use of the debugger as your primary debugging tools. Writing node code you will not be able to utilize the Chrome debugger which by now you should be getting very comfortable with.

Instead use node-inspector, which closely emulates the Chrome debugger experience. Watch Hack Reactor Alumni Adam Ellsworth's screencast on setting up and using node-inspector and be certain to turn to using it for your debugging needs.

Refreshing changes with node servers

If you're running your node server, and then make changes to your server files, you'll have to stop the server (ctrl + c) and then restart it (node my_server_file_name.js). This gets tedious very quickly.

To avoid this, you should check out nodemon. It's a tool that will watch your server files and automatically refresh them so you don't have to. Sweeeeet.

About stubs

You'll notice some stubs in this repo. When you're working from stubs, you should also know what class they're stubbing out, and refer to the docs for that class.

Do not make use of stub properties that begin with underscores. As a convention, when javascript devs prefix object properties with an underscore, it usually means "you probably shouldn't directly manipulate this." In this case, if you use those properties of the stubs, you'll find that they don't exist on real request and response objects.

Package Managers

In part I, you used bower to install and keep track of the tools your client-side code requires. Today, you'll add another popular package manager to the mix called npm to install and keep track of the tools your dev environment and server-side code requires.

npm

Instead of manually downloading all your server-side dependencies to a 'lib' folder that you track with git, You'll use npm to install and manage everything!

npm (faux abbreviation for Node Package Modules) is the official package manager for Node.js. As of Node.js version 0.6.3, npm is bundled and installed automatically with the environment. npm runs through the command line.

According to its author, "npm" is not an abbreviation for "Node Package Modules" or "Node Package Manager". It is a recursive bacronymic abbreviation for "npm is not an acronym". (If it was "ninaa", then it would be an acronym, and thus incorrectly named.)

There are a few ways to use npm to manage packages:

Local Installation

When you install a project dependency (like express) into your projects 'node-modules' folder it's called a 'local' install. Modules that are installed locally must be used/imported via require statements in your js files.

  1│npm install --save underscore
global installation

Some npm packages derive their usefulness through usage in a local shell environment, such as nodemon. In these cases you will need to install the package globally by utilizing the -g flag. You cannot require globally installed packages.

  1│npm install -g nodemon
By default, libraries found in globally installed packages cannot be accessed through require statements. In the case where you want to use a package that has both a JavaScript library and a command line interface, it is best to install the package both globally and locally.

package.json

There is one file in this repo that will control/affect the behavior of npm: package.json, which defines our project's dependencies. Upon initially cloning the repo, be sure to run npm install to install the necessary packages as defined in your package.json file.

When installing a new dependency, you should use the --save flag, which causes npm to automatically add that dependency to your package.json file.

Bare minimum requirements
Continue to use bower to install (and keep track of) all the client-side libraries you use as you work through this sprint.

Use npm to install (and keep track of) all the server-side libraries you use as you work through this sprint.

Learn how to use NodeJS to start an HTTP server and how to connect to that server with a web browser. (Source code for a bare-bones HTTP server is included in the file server/basic-server.js.)
Learn how to use export and require. Write a proper request handling function in the file server/request-handler.js. Use export to make this function available, and use require to import the function into server/basic-server.js and use it there.
Make your Node server implement the URLs you used for your chat client (eg /classes/messages).
Modify your chat-client code to connect to your Node server instead of connecting to Parse. (http://127.0.0.1:3000/ instead of https://api.parse.com/1/). Start the server and try out the client!
Make all the Mocha tests pass
To run Mocha tests for your Node server, you must run npm npm install
Run the tests using npm test from the main directory
The tests in server/spec/ServerSpec.js expect the handleRequest function in server/request-handler.js to be defined
Write at least 3 additional tests.
Tests

Take a tour of the server/spec/ folder and look at how the Stubs interact with the tests
What is the done function in the test suite doing?
Write at least 2 new tests for the server, preferably tests that require you improve your server side code
A Note About Options Requests

You should learn about OPTIONS requests. They are a type of request just like 'GET', or 'POST'. But these are automatically sent whenever there's a cross-domain request (which is often.) Think about options requests as a way for a site to 'check' if it's allowed to do what it's about to do. In this example, am I (the client) allowed to make this cross-domain request?' More generally, it's, 'what options are allowed to me for this resource?'
tl;dr: You'll need to make sure you're handling options requests in your router, and sending back appropriate headers, or else ain't nothing gone work.
Advanced Content
Our advanced content is intended to throw you in over your head, requiring you to solve problems with very little support or oversight, much like you would as a mid or senior level engineer. The following is no exception, and you may have to do a fair amount of work to get enough context to get started.

Make your Node server serve up the static html and js files for the chat client page at http://127.0.0.1:3000/. You will need to use the fs module to accomplish this. If you are successful you will be able to run the client by visiting http://127.0.0.1:3000/ in your browser instead of opening the file.
Again using the fs module, have the server store the message log in a file so that the messages are saved even after you stop and restart the node server.
Research how Node utilizes streams and refactor your server to use them.
Express.js repackages Node.js' API into a clean and easy to use interface. Refactor your server to use Express and marvel at how much nicer your code looks now.
Deploy the codes! Publicize your repo using Liberator and get your server deployed. Even though it make take a little effort to use Liberator, do not under any circumstances deploy your work without using Liberator on it first. For basic deployment options consider researching Otto or Heroku. Congrats, you have your own private (but completely public) chat server for you and your friends to use!
There are lots of ways to build a web server. Check out substacks's take on the matter. In particular, notice his use of npm modules and now refactor your server to use some of the modules he does.
Refactor your server to use Node's cluster module such that multiple client connections to your server utilize multiple CPUs on your computer.
Summarize the chain of events between basic-server's http.createServer(...) and the function call to requestListener.
Throughout your expedition, record your notes for later publication as a blog post.
Start from Node's HTTP module. List/summarize the method calls that happen, skipping over boring steps when possible, and aiming for conceptual completeness and simplicity.
Things will get increasingly more "low-level" -- closer to bare networking concepts and system calls to non-javascript code. Make a judgement calls about when to skip onwards. Beeline for something complete, but very, very simple, and fill in more details later. Watch out for deep rabbit-holes.
Relevant documentation
Node module system - how to export and require
http Node module
Response docs
Request docs
fs Node module
Readable Stream
querystring Node module
Handling POST data in Node
HTTP status codes
HTTP headers fields
Same Origin Policy and CORS
Mocha
How-to-handle-post-request-in-node-js
options requests